#labels Featured,Phase-Design
=Design Description=

MySQL Heap tables keep data in arrays of fixed-size chunks. These chunks are organized into two groups of {{{HP_BLOCK}}} structures:
  * group1 contains indexes, with one {{{HP_BLOCK}}} per key (part of {{{HP_KEYDEF}}})
  * group2 contains record data, with single {{{HP_BLOCK}}} for all records, referenced by {{{HP_SHARE.recordspace.block}}}

While columns used in index are usually small, other columns in the table may need to accomodate larger data. Typically, larger data is placed into VARCHAR or BLOB columns. With actual sizes varying, Heap Engine has to support variable-sized records in memory. Heap Engine implements the concept of dataspace ({{{HP_DATASPACE}}}), which incorporates {{{HP_BLOCK}}} for the record data, and adds more information for managing variable-sized records.

Variable-size records are stored in multiple "chunks", which means that a single record of data (database "row") can consist of multiple chunks organized into one "set". {{{HP_BLOCK}}} contains chunks. In variable-size format, one record is represented as one or many chunks, depending on the actual data, while in fixed-size mode, one record is always represented as one chunk. The index structures would always point to the first chunk in the chunkset.

At the time of table creation, Heap Engine attempts to find out if variable-size records are desired. A user can request variable-size records by providing either {{{row_type=dynamic}}} or {{{block_size=NNN}}} table create option. Heap Engine will check whether {{{block_size}}} provides enough space in the first chunk to keep all null bits and columns that are used in indexes. If {{{block_size}}} is too small, table creation will be aborted with an error. Heap Engine will revert to fixed-size allocation mode if {{{block_size}}} provides no memory benefits (no VARCHAR fields extending past first chunk).

In order to improve index search performance, Heap Engine needs to keep all null flags and all columns used as keys inside the first chunk of a chunkset. In particular, this means that all columns used as keys should be defined first in the table creation SQL. The length of data used by null bits and key columns is stored as {{{fixed_data_length}}} inside {{{HP_SHARE}}}. {{{fixed_data_length}}} will extend past last key column if more fixed-length fields can fit into the first chunk.

Variable-size records are necessary only in the presence of variable-size columns. Heap Engine will be looking for VARCHAR columns, which declare length of 32 or more. If no such columns are found, table will be switched to fixed-size format. You should always try to put such columns at the end of the table definition.

Whenever data is being inserted or updated in the table Heap Engine will calculate how many chunks are necessary. For insert operations, Heap Engine allocates new chunkset in the recordspace. For update operations it will modify length of the existing chunkset, unlinking unnecessary chunks at the end, or allocating and adding more if larger length is necessary.

When writing data to chunks or copying data back to record, Heap Engine will first copy {{{fixed_data_length}}} of data using single memcpy call. The rest of the columns are processed one-by-one. Non-VARCHAR columns are copied in their full format. VARCHAR's are copied based on their actual length. Any NULL values after {{{fixed_data_length}}} are skipped.

The allocation and contents of the actual chunks varies between fixed and variable-size modes. Total chunk length is always aligned to the next {{{sizeof(byte*)}}}. Here is the format of fixed-size chunk:
{{{
   byte[] - sizeof=chunk_dataspace_length, but at least
           sizeof(byte*) bytes. Keeps actual data or pointer
           to the next deleted chunk.
           chunk_dataspace_length equals to full record length
  byte   - status field (1 means "in use", 0 means "deleted")
}}}

Variable-size uses different format:
{{{
   byte[] - sizeof=chunk_dataspace_length, but at least
           sizeof(byte*) bytes. Keeps actual data or pointer
           to the next deleted chunk.
           chunk_dataspace_length is set according to table
           setup (block_size)
  byte*  - pointer to the next chunk in this chunkset,
           or NULL for the last chunk
  byte  -  status field (1 means "first", 0 means "deleted",
           2 means "linked")
}}}

When allocating a new chunkset of N chunks, Heap Engine will try to allocate chunks one-by-one, linking them as they become allocated. Allocation of a single chunk will attempt to reuse a deleted (freed) chunk. If no free chunks are available, it will attempt to allocate a new area inside {{{HP_BLOCK}}}. Freeing chunks will place them at the front of free list referenced by del_link in {{{HP_DATASPACE}}}. The newly freed chunk will contain reference to the previously freed chunk in its first {{{sizeof(byte*)}}} of the payload space.

==Open issues==

Here is the list of open issues:
  # It is not very nice to require people to keep key columns at the beginning of the table creation SQL. There are three proposed resolutions:
    * Leave it as is. It's a reasonable limitation
    * Add new {{{HA_KEEP_KEY_COLUMNS_TO_FRONT}}} flag to handler.h and make table.cpp align columns when it creates the table
    * Make HeapEngine reorder columns in the chunk data, so that key columns go first. Add parallel {{{HA_KEYSEG}}} structures to distinguish positions in record vs. positions in the first chunk. Copy all data field-by-field rather than using single memcpy unless DBA kept key columns to the beginning.
  # {{{heap_check_heap}}} needs verify linked chunks, looking for issues such as orphans, cycles, and bad links. However, Heap Engine today does not do similar things even for free list.
  # With new {{{HP_DATASPACE}}} allocation mechaism, BLOB will become increasingly simple to implement, but I may not have time for that. In one approach, BLOB data can be placed at the end of the same record. In another approach (which I prefer) BLOB data would have its own {{{HP_DATASPACE}}} with variable-size entries.
  # In a more sophisticated implementation, some space can be saved even with all fixed-size columns if many of them have NULL value, as long as these columns are not used in indexes
  # In variable-size format status should be moved to lower bits of the "next" pointer. Pointer is always aligned to {{{sizeof(byte*)}}}, which is at least 4, leaving 2 lower bits free. This will save 8 bytes per chunk on 64-bit platform.
  # As we do not want to modify FRM format, BLOCK_SIZE option of "CREATE TABLE" is saved as "RAID_CHUNKSIZE" for Heap Engine tables.